<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Acknowledgements</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000006607108" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="FMT"><a href="contents.xhtml#re_ack" id="ack">Acknowledgements</a></p>
<p class="TXT">As I write this I am pregnant with my first child. They say it takes a village to raise a kid. I believe that is eventually true, but so far it has been a relatively solitary experience. Writing a book, on the other hand, seems to take a village from the start.</p>
<p class="TXI">First, I have to thank my husband, Josh. We met while both getting our PhDs at the Center for Theoretical Neuroscience at Columbia, which meant he had to serve both as moral support and as fact-checker throughout this process. He also did a good job of making sure I at least occasionally ate proper meals and saw some friends. I’d also like to thank members of his family – Sharon, Roger, Laurie – for their support and excitement.</p>
<p class="TXI">I owe a tremendous debt to the NeuWrite community. I first joined this group of scientists and writers when 
I was a graduate student in New York and quickly joined the London chapter once I moved to the UK. In addition to putting me in contact with the people at Sigma, the members of NeuWrite also provided advice and commiseration about book-writing in general. The opportunity to regularly workshop my chapters with this group helped quell my writing anxiety and, of course, made the book better. Special thanks to Liam Drew, Helen Scales, Roma Agrawal and Emma Bryce. </p>
<p class="TXI">I’ve relied on many friends – both practising neuroscientists and not – to provide input and feedback <a id="page_378"/>on the book. They’ve made these chapters clearer. Much thanks to Nancy Padilla, Yul Kang, Vishal Soni, Jessica Obeysekare, Victor Pope, Sarahjane Tierney, Jana Quinn, Jessica Graves, Alex Cayco-Gajic, Yann Sweeney and (my sister) Ann Lindsay. </p>
<p class="TXI">I also relied on the diverse and amorphous community of researchers known as ‘neuroscience twitter’ to sound ideas off and crowdsource resources. Many thanks to this engaged crowd of friends and strangers alike! </p>
<p class="TXI">I reached out to some researchers with particular expertise to look over different chapters. I’m very thankful for the time and knowledge of Athanasia Papoutsi, Richard Golden, Stefano Fusi, Henning Sprekeler, Corey Maley, Mark Humphries, Jan Drugowitsch and Blake Richards. Of course, any errors that remain in the text are my own fault. </p>
<p class="TXI">The Bloomsbury Sigma team is the reason this book is a reality instead of merely an ill-formed wish in my mind. Thanks to Jim Martin, Angelique Neumann and Anna MacDiarmid for shepherding both me and the book through the process. </p>
<p class="TXI">A general thanks is due to my family (particularly my sisters, Sara and Ann) and friends who have been patiently hearing about ‘the book’ for some time. And finally, I’d like to express my gratitude to the computational neuroscience community as a whole. Floating around this field for nearly 10 years and soaking in knowledge from many different researchers gave me the proper foundation for writing this book. </p>
</body>
</html>