<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 1</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000006607108" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="CN" id="chapter1"><a href="contents.xhtml#re_chapter1">CHAPTER ONE</a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="contents.xhtml#re_chapter1">Spherical Cows</a><a id="page_7"/></p>
<p class="H1" id="b-9781472966445-ch58-sec1">
<span class="bold">
<span>What mathematics has to offer</span>
</span></p>
<p class="TXT">The web-weaving spider <span class="italic">Cyclosa octotuberculata</span> inhabits several locations in and around Japan. About the size of a fingernail and covered in camouflaging specks of black, white and brown, this arachnid is a crafty predator. Sitting at the hub of its expertly built web, it waits to feel vibrations in the web’s threads that are caused by struggling prey. As soon as the spider senses this movement, it storms off in the direction of the signal, ready to devour its catch.</p>
<p class="TXI">Sometimes prey is more commonly found in one location on the web than others. Smart predators know to keep track of these regularities and exploit them. Certain birds, for example, will recall where food has been abundant recently and return to those areas at a later time. <span class="italic">Cyclosa octotuberculata</span> does something similar – but not identical. Rather than remembering the locations that have fared well – that is, rather than storing these locations in its mind and letting them influence its future attention – the spider literally weaves this information into its web. In particular, it uses its legs to tug on the specific silk threads from which prey has recently been detected, making them tighter. The tightened threads are more sensitive to vibrations, making future prey easier to detect on them.</p><a id="page_8"/>
<p class="TXI">Making these alterations to its web, <span class="italic">Cyclosa octotuberculata</span> offloads some of the burden of cognition to its environment. It expels its current knowledge and memory into a compact yet meaningful physical form, making a mark on the world that can guide its future actions. The interacting system of the spider and its web is smarter than the spider could hope to be on its own. This outsourcing of intellect to the environment is known as ‘extended cognition’. </p>
<p class="TXI">Mathematics is a form of extended cognition.</p>
<p class="TXI">When a scientist, mathematician or engineer writes down an equation, they are expanding their own mental capacity. They are offloading their knowledge of a complicated relationship on to symbols on a page. By writing these symbols down, they leave a trail of their thinking for others and for themselves in the future. Cognitive scientists hypothesise that spiders and other small animals rely on extended cognition because their brains are too limited to do all the complex mental tasks required to thrive in their environment. We are no different. Without tools like mathematics our ability to think and act effectively in the world is severely limited. </p>
<p class="TXI">Mathematics makes us better in some of the same ways written language does. But mathematics goes beyond everyday language because it is a language that can do real work. The mechanics of mathematics – the rules for rearranging, substituting and expanding its symbols – are not arbitrary. They are a systematic way to export the process of thinking to paper or machines. Alfred Whitehead, a revered twentieth-century mathematician whose work we will encounter in <a href="chapter3.xhtml#chapter3">Chapter 3</a>, has been paraphrased as saying: ‘The ultimate <a id="page_9"/>goal of mathematics is to eliminate any need for intelligent thought.’ </p>
<p class="TXI">Given this useful feature of mathematics, some scientific subjects – physics chief among them – have developed an ethos centred on rigorous quantitative thinking. Scientists in these fields have capitalised on the power of mathematics for centuries. They know that mathematics is the only language precise and efficient enough to describe the natural world. They know that the specialised notation of equations expertly compresses information, making an equation like a picture: it can be worth a thousand words. They also know that mathematics keeps scientists honest. When communicating through the formalism of mathematics, assumptions are laid bare and ambiguities have nowhere to hide. In this way, equations force clear and coherent thinking. As Bertrand Russell (a colleague of Whitehead whom we will also meet in <a href="chapter3.xhtml#chapter3">Chapter 3</a>) wrote: ‘Everything is vague to a degree you do not realise till you have tried to make it precise.’ </p>
<p class="TXI">The final lesson that quantitative scientists have learnt is that the beauty of mathematics lies in its ability to be both specific and universal. An equation can capture exactly how the pendulum in the barometrical clock on the Ministers’ Landing at Buckingham Palace will swing; the very same equation describes the electrical circuits responsible for broadcasting radio stations around the world. When an analogy exists between underlying mechanisms, equations serve as the embodiment of that analogy. As an invisible thread tying together disparate topics, mathematics is a means by which advances in one field can have surprising and disproportionate impacts on other, far-flung areas.</p><a id="page_10"/>
<p class="TXI">Biology – including the study of the brain – has been slower to embrace mathematics than some other fields. A certain portion of biologists, for reasons good and bad, have historically eyed mathematics with some scepticism. In their opinion, mathematics is both too complex and too simple to be of much use.</p>
<p class="TXI">Some biologists find mathematics too complex because – trained as they are in the practical work of performing lab experiments and not in the abstract details of mathematical notion – they see lengthy equations as meaningless scribble on the page. Without seeing the function in the symbols, they’d rather do without them. As biologist Yuri Lazebnik wrote in a 2002 plea for more mathematics in his field: ‘In biology, we use several arguments to convince ourselves that problems that require calculus can be solved with arithmetic if one tries hard enough and does another series of experiments.’</p>
<p class="TXI">Yet mathematics is also considered too simple to capture the overwhelming richness of biological phenomena. An old joke among physicists highlights the sometimes absurd level of simplification that mathematical approaches can require. The joke starts with a dairy farmer struggling with milk production. After trying everything he could think to get his beloved cows to produce more, he decides to ask the physicist at the local university for help. The physicist listens carefully to the problem and goes back to his office to think. After some consideration, he comes back to the farmer and says: ‘I found a solution. First, we must assume a spherical cow in a vacuum … ’ </p>
<p class="TXI">Simplifying a problem is what opens it up to mathematical analysis, so inevitably some biological details get lost in <a id="page_11"/>translation from the real world to the equations. As a result, those who use mathematics are frequently disparaged as being too disinterested in those details. In his 1897 book <span class="italic">Advice for a Young Investigator</span>, Santiago Ramón y Cajal (the father of modern neuroscience whose work is discussed in <a href="chapter9.xhtml#chapter9">Chapter 9</a>) wrote about these reality-avoiding theorists in a chapter entitled ‘Diseases of the Will’. He identified their symptoms as ‘a facility for exposition, a creative and restless imagination, an aversion to the laboratory, and an indomitable dislike for concrete science and seemingly unimportant data’. Cajal also lamented the theorist’s preference for beauty over facts. Biologists study living things that are abundant with specific traits and nuanced exceptions to any rule. Mathematicians – driven by simplicity, elegance and the need to make things manageable – squash that abundance when they put it into equations. </p>
<p class="TXI">Oversimplification and an obsession with aesthetics are legitimate pitfalls to avoid when applying mathematics to the real world. Yet, at the same time, the richness and complexity of biology is exactly why it needs mathematics.</p>
<p class="TXI">Consider a simple biological question. There are two types of animals in a forest: rabbits and foxes. Foxes eat rabbits, rabbits eat grass. If the forest starts off with a certain number of foxes and a certain number of rabbits, what will happen to these two populations? </p>
<p class="TXI">Perhaps the foxes ferociously gobble up the rabbits, bringing them to extinction. But then the foxes, having exhausted their food source, will starve and die off themselves. This leaves us with a rather empty forest. On the other hand, maybe the fox population isn’t so <a id="page_12"/>ravenous. Perhaps they reduce the rabbit population to almost zero but not quite. The fox population still plummets as each individual struggles to find the remaining rabbits. But then – with most of the foxes gone – the rabbit population can rebound. Of course, now the food for the foxes is abundant again and, if enough of their population remains, they too can resurge.</p>
<p class="TXI">When it comes to knowing the outcome for the forest, there is a clear limitation to relying on intuition. Trying to ‘think through’ this scenario, as simple as it is, using just words and stories is insufficient. To make progress, we must define our terms precisely and state their relationships exactly – and that means we’re doing mathematics. </p>
<p class="TXI">In fact, the mathematical model of predator–prey interactions that can help us here is known as the Lotka–Volterra model and it was developed in the 1920s. The Lotka-Volterra model consists of two equations: one that describes the growth of the prey population in terms of the numbers of prey and predators, and another that describes the growth of the predator population in terms of the numbers of predators and prey. Using dynamical systems theory – a set of mathematical tools initially forged to describe the interactions of celestial bodies – these equations can tell us whether the foxes will eventually die off, or the rabbits will, or if they’ll carry on in this dance together forever. In this way, the use of mathematics makes us better at understanding biology. Without it, we are sadly limited by our own innate cognitive talents. As Lazebnik wrote: ‘Understanding 
[a complex] system without formal analytical tools requires geniuses, who are so rare even outside biology.’</p><a id="page_13"/>
<p class="TXI">To look at a bit of biology and see how it can be reduced to variables and equations requires creativity, expertise and discernment. The scientist must see through the messy details of the real world and find the bare-bones structure that underlies it. Each component of their model must be defined appropriately and exactly. Once a structure is found and an equation written, however, the fruits of this discipline are manifest. Mathematical models are a way to describe a theory about how a biological system works precisely enough to communicate it to others. If this theory is a good one, the model can also be used to predict the outcomes of future experiments and to synthesise results from the past. And by running these equations on a computer, models provide a ‘virtual laboratory’, a way to quickly and easily plug in different values to see how different scenarios may turn out and even perform ‘experiments’ not yet feasible in the physical world. By working through scenarios and hypotheses digitally this way, models help scientists determine what parts of a system are important to its function and, importantly, which are not. </p>
<p class="TXI">Such integral work could hardly be carried out using simple stories unaccompanied by mathematics. As Larry Abbott, a prominent theoretical neuroscientist and co-author<sup><a href="#fn-1" id="fnt-1">1</a>
</sup> of one of the most widely used textbooks on the subject, explained in a 2008 article:</p> 
<p class="EXT">
<span class="italic">Equations force a model to be precise, complete and self-consistent, and they allow its full implications to be worked out. It is not difficult to find word models in the conclusions sections of older <a id="page_14"/>neuroscience papers that sound reasonable but, when expressed as mathematical models, turn out to be inconsistent and unworkable. Mathematical formulation of a model forces it to be self-consistent and, although self-consistency is not necessarily truth, self-inconsistency is certainly falsehood.</span></p>
<p class="TXT">The brain – composed of (in the case of humans) some 100 billion neurons, each their own bubbling factory of chemicals and electricity, all interacting in a jumble of ways with their neighbours both near and far – is a prime example of a biological object too complex to be understood without mathematics. The brain is the seat of cognition and consciousness. It is responsible for how we feel, how we think, how we move, who we are. It is where days are planned, memories are stored, passions are felt, choices are made, words are read. It is the inspiration for artificial intelligence and the source of mental illness. To understand how all this can be accomplished by a single complex of cells, interfacing with a body and the world, demands mathematical modelling at multiple levels. </p>
<p class="TXI">Despite the hesitancy felt by some biologists, mathematical models can be found hidden in all corners of the history of neuroscience. And while it was traditionally the domain of adventurous physicists or wandering mathematicians, today ‘theoretical’ or ‘computational’ neuroscience is a fully developed subdivision of the neuroscience enterprise with dedicated journals, conferences, textbooks and funding sources. The mathematical mindset is influencing the whole of the study of the brain. As Abbott wrote: ‘Biology used to be a refuge for students fleeing mathematics, but now many <a id="page_15"/>life sciences students have a solid knowledge of basic mathematics and computer programming, and those that don’t at least feel guilty about it.’<sup><a href="#fn-2" id="fnt-2">2</a>
</sup> </p>
<p class="TXI">Yet the biologist’s apprehension around mathematical models should not be entirely dismissed. ‘All models are wrong,’ starts the popular phrase by statistician George Box. Indeed, all models <span class="italic">are</span> wrong, because all models ignore some details. All models are also wrong because they represent only a biased view of the processes they claim to capture. And all models are wrong because they favour simplicity over absolute accuracy. All models are wrong the same way all poems are wrong; they capture an essence, if not a perfect literal truth. ‘All models are wrong but some are useful,’ says Box. If the farmer in the old joke reminded the physicist that cows are not, in fact, spherical, the physicist’s response would be, ‘Who cares?’, or more accurately, ‘Do we need to care?’. Detail for detail’s sake is not a virtue. A map the size of the city has no good use. The art of mathematical modelling is in deciding which details matter and steadfastly ignoring those that do not. </p>
<p class="TXI">This book charts the influence of mathematical thinking – borrowed from physics, engineering, statistics and computer science – on the study of the brain. Each chapter tells, for a different topic in neuroscience, the story of the biology, the mathematics and the interplay between the two. No special knowledge of mathematics is assumed <a id="page_16"/>on the part of the reader; the ideas behind the equations will be explained.<sup><a href="#fn-3" id="fnt-3">3</a>
</sup> No single theory of the brain is being proposed; different models solve different problems and offer complementary approaches to understanding. </p>
<p class="TXI">The chapters are ordered from the low to the high level: from the physics of single cells up to the mathematics of behaviour. The stories in these chapters include the struggles encountered in unifying mathematics and biology, and the scientists who did the struggling. They show that sometimes experiments inform models and sometimes models inform experiments. They also show that a model can be anything from a few equations confined to a page to countless lines of code run on supercomputers. In this way, the book is a tapestry of the many forms mathematical models of the brain can take. Yet while the topics and models covered are diverse, common themes do reappear throughout the pages. </p>
<p class="TXI">Of course, everything in this book may be wrong. It may be wrong because it is science and our understanding of the world is ever-evolving. It may be wrong because it is history and there is always more than one way to tell a story. And, most importantly, it <span class="italic">is</span> wrong because it is mathematics. Mathematical models of the mind do not make for perfect replicas of the brain, nor should we strive for them to be. Yet in the study of the most complex object in the known universe, mathematical models are not just useful but absolutely essential. The brain will not be understood though words alone.</p>
<p class="H1">Notes</p>
<p class="FN1"><a href="chapter1.xhtml#fnt-1" id="fn-1">1</a> ﻿Along with Peter Dayan, whom we will meet in ﻿﻿Chapter 11﻿﻿.﻿</p>
<p class="FN1"><a href="chapter1.xhtml#fnt-2" id="fn-2">2</a> ﻿This guilt may not be entirely new. Charles Darwin, certainly a successful biologist, wrote in an 1887 autobiography: ﻿‘﻿I have deeply regretted that I did not proceed far enough at least to understand something of the great leading principles of mathematics, for men thus endowed seem to have an extra sense.﻿’﻿ ﻿</p>
<p class="FN1"><a href="chapter1.xhtml#fnt-3" id="fn-3">3</a> ﻿However, for the mathematically inclined, an appendix elaborating on one of the main equations per chapter is provided at the end of the book. ﻿</p>
</body>
</html>