<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/">
  <head>
    <meta name="dcterms.conformsTo" content="PXE Basic 1.0"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="PXE Tools version 1.39.52"/>
    <!--Created by pxe.pl for standard version PXE Basic 1.0,data-profile-product=standard by PXE Tools 1.39.52, partial=false-->
    <title>6.7 Summary </title>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="night" href="../css/theme/night.css"/>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="sepia" href="../css/theme/sepia.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre">
<section id="P7000497027000000000000000005B21" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre3"><header class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 calibre"><h1 class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre4" id="P7000497027000000000000000044278" data-uri="chapter06.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000044278" epub:type="title"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre5" id="P7000497027000000000000000005B23" title="648" data-uri="chapter06.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000005B23" epub:type="pagebreak"></span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">6.7 </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Summary </span></h1></header>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000044279" data-uri="chapter06.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000044279" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">The basic storage technologies are random access memories (RAMs), nonvolatile memories (ROMs), and disks. RAM comes in two basic forms. Static RAM (SRAM) is faster and more expensive and is used for cache memories. Dynamic RAM (DRAM) is slower and less expensive and is used for the main memory and graphics frame buffers. ROMs retain their information even if the supply voltage is turned off. They are used to store firmware. Rotating disks are mechanical nonvolatile storage devices that hold enormous amounts of data at a low cost per bit, but with much longer access times than DRAM. Solid state disks (SSDs) based on nonvolatile flash memory are becoming increasingly attractive alternatives to rotating disks for some applications.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000004427A" data-uri="chapter06.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000004427A" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">In general, faster storage technologies are more expensive per bit and have smaller capacities. The price and performance properties of these technologies are changing at dramatically different rates. In particular, DRAM and disk access times are much larger than CPU cycle times. Systems bridge these gaps by organizing memory as a hierarchy of storage devices, with smaller, faster devices at the top and larger, slower devices at the bottom. Because well-written programs have good locality, most data are served from the higher levels, and the effect is a memory system that runs at the rate of the higher levels, but at the cost and capacity of the lower levels.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000004427B" data-uri="chapter06.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000004427B" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Programmers can dramatically improve the running times of their programs by writing programs with good spatial and temporal locality. Exploiting SRAM-based cache memories is especially important. Programs that fetch data primarily from cache memories can run much faster than programs that fetch data primarily from memory.</p>
</section></body></html>
