<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/">
  <head>
    <meta name="dcterms.conformsTo" content="PXE Basic 1.0"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="PXE Tools version 1.39.52"/>
    <!--Created by pxe.pl for standard version PXE Basic 1.0,data-profile-product=standard by PXE Tools 1.39.52, partial=false-->
    <title>10.12 Summary </title>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="night" href="../css/theme/night.css"/>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="sepia" href="../css/theme/sepia.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre">
<section id="P7000497027000000000000000007B1B" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre3"><header class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 calibre"><h1 class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre4" id="P7000497027000000000000000046639" data-uri="chapter10.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046639" epub:type="title"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">10.12 </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Summary </span></h1></header>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000004663A" data-uri="chapter10.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000004663A" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Linux provides a small number of system-level functions, based on the Unix I/O model, that allow applications to open, close, read, and write files, to fetch file metadata, and to perform I/O redirection. Linux read and write operations are subject to short counts that applications must anticipate and handle correctly. Instead of calling the Unix I/O functions directly, applications should use the R<span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre29 pcalibre2">io </span>package, which deals with short counts automatically by repeatedly performing read and write operations until all of the requested data have been transferred.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000004663B" data-uri="chapter10.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000004663B" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">The Linux kernel uses three related data structures to represent open files. Entries in a descriptor table point to entries in the open file table, which point to entries in the v-node table. Each process has its own distinct descriptor table, while all processes share the same open file and v-node tables. Understanding the general organization of these structures clarifies our understanding of both file sharing and I/O redirection.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000004663C" data-uri="chapter10.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000004663C" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">The standard I/O library is implemented on top of Unix I/O and provides a powerful set of higher-level I/O routines. For most applications, standard I/O is the <span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre5" id="P7000497027000000000000000007B20" title="914" data-uri="chapter10.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000007B20" epub:type="pagebreak"></span>simpler, preferred alternative to Unix I/O. However, because of some mutually incompatible restrictions on standard I/O and network files, Unix I/O, rather than standard I/O, should be used for network applications.</p>
</section></body></html>
