<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/">
  <head>
    <meta name="dcterms.conformsTo" content="PXE Basic 1.0"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="PXE Tools version 1.39.52"/>
    <!--Created by pxe.pl for standard version PXE Basic 1.0,data-profile-product=standard by PXE Tools 1.39.52, partial=false-->
    <title>1.10 Summary </title>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="night" href="../css/theme/night.css"/>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="sepia" href="../css/theme/sepia.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre">
<section id="P7000497027000000000000000000256" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre3"><header class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 calibre"><h1 class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre4" id="P700049702700000000000000003E64F" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000003E64F" epub:type="title"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">1.10 </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Summary </span></h1></header>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000003E650" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000003E650" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">A computer system consists of hardware and systems software that cooperate to run application programs. Information inside the computer is represented as groups of bits that are interpreted in different ways, depending on the context. Programs are translated by other programs into different forms, beginning as ASCII text and then translated by compilers and linkers into binary executable files.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000003E651" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000003E651" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Processors read and interpret binary instructions that are stored in main memory. Since computers spend most of their time copying data between memory, I/O devices, and the CPU registers, the storage devices in a system are arranged in a hierarchy, with the CPU registers at the top, followed by multiple levels of hardware cache memories, DRAM main memory, and disk storage. Storage devices that are higher in the hierarchy are faster and more costly per bit than those lower in the <span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre5" id="P700049702700000000000000000025A" title="28" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000000025A" epub:type="pagebreak"></span>hierarchy. Storage devices that are higher in the hierarchy serve as caches for devices that are lower in the hierarchy. Programmers can optimize the performance of their C programs by understanding and exploiting the memory hierarchy.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000003E652" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000003E652" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">The operating system kernel serves as an intermediary between the application and the hardware. It provides three fundamental abstractions: (1) Files are abstractions for I/O devices. (2) Virtual memory is an abstraction for both main memory and disks. (3) Processes are abstractions for the processor, main memory, and I/O devices.</p>
<p id="P700049702700000000000000003E653" data-uri="chapter01.xhtml#P700049702700000000000000003E653" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Finally, networks provide ways for computer systems to communicate with one another. From the viewpoint of a particular system, the network is just another I/O device.</p>
</section></body></html>
