<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/">
  <head>
    <meta name="dcterms.conformsTo" content="PXE Basic 1.0"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="PXE Tools version 1.39.52"/>
    <!--Created by pxe.pl for standard version PXE Basic 1.0,data-profile-product=standard by PXE Tools 1.39.52, partial=false-->
    <title>11.7 Summary </title>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="night" href="../css/theme/night.css"/>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="sepia" href="../css/theme/sepia.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre">
<section id="P7000497027000000000000000007FE5" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre3"><header class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 calibre"><h1 class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre4" id="P7000497027000000000000000046B0A" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046B0A" epub:type="title"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">11.7 </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Summary </span></h1></header>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000046B0B" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046B0B" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Every network application is based on the client-server model. With this model, an application consists of a server and one or more clients. The server manages resources, providing a service for its clients by manipulating the resources in some way. The basic operation in the client-server model is a client-server transaction, which consists of a request from a client, followed by a response from the server.</p>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000046B0C" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046B0C" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Clients and servers communicate over a global network known as the Internet. From a programmer's point of view, we can think of the Internet as a worldwide collection of hosts with the following properties: (1) Each Internet host has a unique 32-bit name called its IP address. (2) The set of IP addresses is mapped to a set of Internet domain names. (3) Processes on different Internet hosts can communicate with each other over connections.</p>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000046B0D" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046B0D" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">Clients and servers establish connections by using the sockets interface. A socket is an end point of a connection that is presented to applications in the form of a file descriptor. The sockets interface provides functions for opening and closing socket descriptors. Clients and servers communicate with each other by reading and writing these descriptors.</p>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000046B0E" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000046B0E" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre5" id="P7000497027000000000000000007FEB" title="965" data-uri="chapter11.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000007FEB" epub:type="pagebreak"></span>Web servers and their clients (such as browsers) communicate with each other using the HTTP protocol. A browser requests either static or dynamic content from the server. A request for static content is served by fetching a file from the server's disk and returning it to the client. A request for dynamic content is served by running a program in the context of a child process on the server and returning its output to the client. The CGI standard provides a set of rules that govern how the client passes program arguments to the server, how the server passes these arguments and other information to the child process, and how the child sends its output back to the client. A simple but functioning Web server that serves both static and dynamic content can be implemented in a few hundred lines of C code.</p>
</section></body></html>
