<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/">
  <head>
    <meta name="dcterms.conformsTo" content="PXE Basic 1.0"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="PXE Tools version 1.39.52"/>
    <!--Created by pxe.pl for standard version PXE Basic 1.0,data-profile-product=standard by PXE Tools 1.39.52, partial=false-->
    <title>3.12 Summary </title>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="night" href="../css/theme/night.css"/>
    <link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="sepia" href="../css/theme/sepia.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre">
<section id="P70004970270000000000000000032D2" class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre3"><header class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 calibre"><h1 class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre4" id="P7000497027000000000000000041514" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000041514" epub:type="title"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">3.12 </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Summary </span></h1></header>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000041515" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000041515" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">In this chapter, we have peered beneath the layer of abstraction provided by the C language to get a view of machine-level programming. By having the compiler generate an assembly-code representation of the machine-level program, we gain insights into both the compiler and its optimization capabilities, along with the machine, its data types, and its instruction set. In <a class="pcalibre15 pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre16 pcalibre14 pcalibre28" href="fileP7000497027000000000000000004893.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000004893"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Chapter </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">5</span></a>, we will see that knowing the characteristics of a compiler can help when trying to write programs that have efficient mappings onto the machine. We have also gotten amore complete picture of how the program stores data in different memory regions. In <a class="pcalibre15 pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre16 pcalibre14 pcalibre28" href="fileP7000497027000000000000000008060.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000008060"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">Chapter </span><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre21 pcalibre2">12</span></a>, we will see many examples where application programmers need to know whether a program variable is on the run-time stack, in some dynamically allocated data structure, or part of the global program data. Understanding how programs map onto machines makes it easier to understand the differences between these kinds of storage.</p>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000041516" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000041516" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2"><span class="pcalibre1 pcalibre2 pcalibre5" id="P70004970270000000000000000032D6" title="310" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P70004970270000000000000000032D6" epub:type="pagebreak"></span>Machine-level programs, and their representation by assembly code, differ in many ways from C programs. There is minimal distinction between different data types. The program is expressed as a sequence of instructions, each of which performs a single operation. Parts of the program state, such as registers and the run-time stack, are directly visible to the programmer. Only low-level operations are provided to support data manipulation and program control. The compiler must use multiple instructions to generate and operate on different data structures and to implement control constructs such as conditionals, loops, and procedures. We have covered many different aspects of C and how it gets compiled. We have seen that the lack of bounds checking in C makes many programs prone to buffer overflows. This has made many systems vulnerable to attacks by malicious intruders, although recent safeguards provided by the run-time system and the compiler help make programs more secure.</p>
<p id="P7000497027000000000000000041517" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000041517" class="pcalibre8 pcalibre1 pcalibre2">We have only examined the mapping of C onto x86-64, but much of what we have covered is handled in a similar way for other combinations of language and machine. For example, compiling C++ is very similar to compiling C. In fact, early implementations of C++ first performed a source-to-source conversion from C++ to C and generated object code by running a C compiler on the result. C++ objects are represented by structures, similar to a C <code id="P7000497027000000000000000041518" data-uri="chapter03.xhtml#P7000497027000000000000000041518" class="pcalibre1 calibre1 pcalibre2">struct</code>. Methods are represented by pointers to the code implementing the methods. By contrast, Java is implemented in an entirely different fashion. The object code of Java is a special binary representation known as <i class="pcalibre17 pcalibre2 pcalibre1">Java byte code</i>. This code can be viewed as a machine-level program for a <i class="pcalibre17 pcalibre2 pcalibre1">virtual machine</i>. As its name suggests, this machine is not implemented directly in hardware. Instead, software interpreters process the byte code, simulating the behavior of the virtual machine. Alternatively, an approach known as <i class="pcalibre17 pcalibre2 pcalibre1">just-in-time compilation</i> dynamically translates byte code sequences into machine instructions. This approach provides faster execution when code is executed multiple times, such as in loops. The advantage of using byte code as the low-level representation of a program is that the same code can be "executed" on many different machines, whereas the machine code we have considered runs only on x86-64 machines.</p>
</section></body></html>
